BRIEF BACKGROUND OF GREEN PASTURE CHRISTIAN OUTREACH.
Green Pasture Christian Outreach was birthed in June 1998 in the poverty stricken slums of Maluku, during the meeting between a poor struggling pastor of the Redeemed Church Maluku Mbale (u) (the one speaking to you now) and Philemon Barasa a S.6 leaver by then. This is where the idea of initiating this organization started from. This was to answer the question ` What can the poor do to help the fellow poor and together lead a better life holistically? ` I had this question for long. After the idea to start the organization was conceived, we made consultations with senior pastors in Mbale. Among the pastors consulted was Rev Peter Emiu of PAG, Pastor Ben Otim of Chrisco Church (RIP) and a number of Executives of various Christian NGOs in Mbale. The new visionary organization needed to be given a name but at that time I did not have a name readily to give to it. In prayer and fasting period, I requested the leadership and the flock of Redeemed Church in Maluku to pray with me asking God for the name. It was at this particular time that Pastor Grace Buluma who was one of the elders by then, had a dream. In a dream, she asked me, “What are you doing” to which I responded “I’m digging the foundation of green pasture”. It was through this dream that the name Green pasture was derived in reference to Psalms 23: 1-2.
The organization came into existence at a time when Uganda was experiencing wars in the northern part of the country with the LRA under Joseph Kony. Teso sub region was just recovering from armed rebellion coupled with cattle rustling by the Karamojong worriers. The scourge of HIV/AIDS had affected many lives negatively. All these calamities and wars had brought the problem of orphans, widows and many vulnerable persons in Uganda and more so in the Eastern part of the country.
At first, Green pasture Christian Outreach was mistakenly viewed by some people as one of the Christian organizations to offer relief and handouts to the needy people. However, this was not the case with GPCO, myself and other founding members felt it was better to empower people for self sustainability, for continued transformation of individual persons, larger community and strongly discouraging the dependence syndrome. We therefore chose to embark on education and training programmes as means of skilling and instilling entrepreneurship into the learners.
We draw many lessons from the ministry of Jesus Christ in the Bible who miraculously provided fish and bread to the multitudes and spent most quality time teaching principles. He caused change and ushered people into places of self discipline, positive attitude towards work and responsibility.  Green Pasture as a Christian Organization has found it inevitable to recognize the God given abilities in the young people and help them to develop economically and socially dependable persons.  The parable of the talents in Matthew 25: 14 -30 is a good example and foundational for us in Green Pasture that we use to shape and guide the people of God in realizing the potential in each one of them with a sense of accountability and stewardship in every aspect of life. The parable of the talents has been seen as an exhortation to us all to use our God-given gifts in the service of God, and to take risks for the sake of the Kingdom of God.
This made people to perceive Green pasture Christian outreach as mean. This is because many Ugandans in the rural poverty stricken areas would wish to have relief and hand outs. I can confess that the Holy Spirit guided us as an organization to embrace and foster empowerment programs because it is more effective.
There is a tendency of humans not to change (cognitive dissonance). This was to some extent a big challenge to the work of Green Pasture in transformation of the greater Musoto village and the surrounding villages. Our persistence however, with God given empowerment methods yielded tremendous results in that thousands of youths have gone through green pasture schools, pastors’ trainings, equipping conference and have themselves testified of the good of these empowerment activities.
ACHIEVEMENTS
EQUIPING CONFERENCE FOR LEADERS
Much has changed since 1998 as a result of these trainings, hundreds of pastors and other categories of Christian leaders have testified how the Green pasture conferences have helped them to improve on their leadership skills. They have continuously expressed their gratitude how these trainings have enabled them to raise up Godly and dependable leadership in their various church organizations. On average, about 600 participants attend the equipping conference per year and approximately 1100 Christian leaders of different levels have at least participated in the leadership conferences. The training being holistic in nature has helped many leaders to lead a better life as well as implementing ways of improving their personal welfare and wellbeing of the communities. This has been possible because the conferences and workshops conducted by Green pasture have taught and emphasized the application of biblical teachings which cover spiritual, social and economic growth.
Besides, GPCO has offered trainings on Family and marriage support, The organization has continued to provide family and marriage support to the communities. A team of women have been trained to support fellow women in marriage related challenges who in turn train other women.

SCHOOLS AND COLLEGE
By the grace of God, Green Pasture Christian Outreach has established schools as a way of promoting education for the rural remote communities of Mbale district. The Green pasture Secondary and vocational school was the first to offer free secondary Education in Mbale in the year 2001.
This enabled youth who had dropped out of school due to lack of school fees to get a chance of receiving secondary and vocational education from within their community. The social economic status of Musoto has improved tremendously through Green Pasture Christian outreach Education programs.
Wampewo Green Pasture P/S is another mile stone of the Green pasture developments, the first of its kind in the place that had been disconnected from the rest of Mbale by swamps. Since then Wampewo has gained a new face value in that school dropout rate has reduced. Currently the school has over 470 pupils.
Trio Hill View Nursery and Primary school in Kween district, Ngenge Sub County is another new establishment where we are seeing God use us to help struggling families. I am happy to let you know that this village has readily welcomed Green Pasture to work side by side with them for development purpose. The school has to a tune of 450 pupils.
College/ University.
At the launching of the secondary school we eventually projected that there should come Green Pasture University and today as we talk, a college is taking shape with ultimate goal of achieving a world class university by 2022. Currently the college is offering courses in Diploma and Certificate in Theology. We are waiting for approval from NCHE for Diploma and certificate in Business administration, Public Administration and Computer studies.  NCHE has recommended GPC to be viable and asked few things to be put in place.

Christian chamber of commerce
Green Pasture Christian Outreach in collaboration with other stake holders have formed the Christian Chamber of Commerce to bring Christian business people together, improving their business skills and increasing capital base. This has created both international and local business connection besides realizing the market place ministry.
Green Pasture Savings and Credit Cooperative (SACCO)
Green pasture Sacco has been a big milestone to the organization, the Sacco was established to encourage the good savings culture to the community in both savings and credit services. The government of Uganda has on many occasions supported the establishment of SACCOs. Over 40 small scale businesses have been empowered through the Green Pasture SACCO to resulting to greater business people.
Partnerships with organizations and churches:-
We have worked in partnership with local and International entities like Equipping leaders International and other organizations within Uganda like Oasis, Goshen Blessings Uganda, and Fields of Life and others in the area of Education.
GPCO has partnered with over 80 churches in the eastern part of the country in training up leaders especially those in rural areas. This has led to new ideas like church planting and birthed new partnerships within and outside world like in USA, UK, Kenya, Nigeria etc.
Biblical unity and fellowship is a big achievement registered by GPCO. Unity among the different Christian organizations and entities has been reinforced by Green pasture Christian Outreach just as our Lord Jesus Christ emphasized in John 17: 20 and 21:- "I do not pray for these alone, but also for those who will believe in me through their word; that they all may be one, as you, father, are in me, and I in you; that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that you sent me", the organization has had a privilege of working together with different Christian entities. A few of these include, Pentecostal churches here in Uganda, United Methodist church USA, Anglican Churches, Evangelical churches of West Africa, Presbyterian, to mention but a few.
These partnerships are a frequent occurrence in any non profit world that is often encouraged by funders and governments to support development through other collaborating organizations.
Challenges
Ø  Green pasture Christian Outreach still experience the challenge of inadequate funding especially for Administrative costs to enable the smooth running of the organization.
Ø  The organization is under- staffed. Currently there are few volunteers run the organization effectively.  
Ø  There is increasing number of orphans in the communities but the organization cannot offer much because of limited resources to support of the orphaned children.
Ø  Lack of Funds
Green pasture finds it difficult to garner sufficient and continuous funding for their work. Gaining access to appropriate donors is a major component of this challenge. GPCO has limited resource mobilization skills locally, so instead wait for international donors to approach us. Current donors may shift priorities and withdraw funding. The NGO suffers from a general insufficient of project, organizational and financial sustainability.
Ø  Insufficient of Strategic Planning
GPCO suffers from the insufficient of a cohesive, strategic plan that would facilitate success in its activities and mission. This renders the organization unable to effectively raise and capitalize on financial support.
There is minimal use of current technologies that could facilitate better communication and networking. More effective use of technology can assist Green Pasture Christian Outreach in staying abreast of important regional, national and global concerns.
Ø  Limited Capacity
GPCO lacks the technical and organizational capacity to implement and fulfill the mission due to insufficient training for capacity building for staff. Weak capacity affects fundraising ability, governance, leadership and technical areas like Monitoring and evaluation, project coordinators.

Future prospective plans
Expand our on programmes by replicating services to some other areas in Uganda.
Expand land to about 20 acres to take care of the University developments and other project.
Work towards achieving the vision of Green Pasture University.
Establishing youth Empowerment programmes like skills development.

Concluding remarks
I urge that empowerment of young people who are the majority population of this country be done so as to alleviate poverty. This is evidenced by the GDP per capita (current US$) in Uganda reported at 580 USD in 2016, according to the World Bank collection of development indicator as compared to USA with the average annual wages in 2016 which amounted to 60,154 U.S. dollars. According to Ugandan Youth Statistics Youth in Uganda are the largest populations in the world, with 77% of its population being under 30 years of age. There are 7,310,386 youth from the ages of 15–24 years of age living in Uganda. And the biting unemployment problem, currently the unemployment rate for young people ages 15–24 is 83%. Not forgetting that the fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom and by righteousness the nation is established.

